Angel develops episode 4 (#22)
esciencecenter-digital-skills/Natural-language-processing: episodes/04-transformers.md

In 2019, the BERT language model was introduced using a novel architecture called Transformer (2017), which allowed precisely to integrate words' context into representations. To understand BERT, we will first look at what a transformer is and we will then directly use some code to make use of BERT.

# Transformers

Every text can be seen as a sequence of sentences and likewise each sentence can be seen as a sequence of tokens (we use the term _token_ instead of _word_ because it is more general: tokens can be words, punctuation symbols, numbers, or even sub-words). Traditionally Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs; and later their fancy version, LSTMs) were used to tackle token and sentence classification problems to account for the interdependencies inherent to sequences of symbols (i.e. sentences). RNNs were in theory powerful enough to capture these dependencies, something that is very valuable when dealing with language, but in practice they were resource consuming (both in training time and computational resources) and also the longer the sequences got, the harder it was to capture long-distance dependencies succesfully.

> The Transformer is a neural network architecture proposed by Google researchers [in 2017](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1706.03762) to address these and other limitations of RNNs and LSTMs. In their paper, *Attention is all you Need*, they tackled especifically the problem of Machine Translation (MT), which in NLP terms is stated as: how to generate a sentence (sequence of words) in target language B given a sentence in source language A? In order to translate, first one neural network needs to _encode_ the meaning of the source language A into vector representations, and then a second neural network needs to _decode_ that representation into tokens that are understandable in language B. Therefore translation is modeling language B _conditioned_ on what language A originally said.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Transformer is a neural network architecture proposed by Google researchers [in 2017](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1706.03762) to address these and other limitations of RNNs and LSTMs. In their paper, *Attention is all you Need*, they tackled specifically the problem of Machine Translation (MT), which in NLP terms is stated as: how to generate a sentence (sequence of words) in target language B given a sentence in source language A? In order to translate, first one neural network needs to _encode_ the meaning of the source language A into vector representations, and then a second neural network needs to _decode_ that representation into tokens that are understandable in language B. Therefore translation is modeling language B _conditioned_ on what language A originally said.
```

::: callout
## Pretraining BERT
To obtain the BERT vector representations the Encoder is pre-trained with two different tasks:
- **Masked Language Model:** for each sentence, mask one token at a time and predict which token is missing based on the context from both sides. A training input example would be "Maria [MASK] Groningen" and the model should predict the word "loves".
- **Next Sentence Prediction:** the Encoder gets a linear binary classifier on top, which is trained to decide for each pair of sequences A and B, if sequence A precedes sequence B in a text. For the sentence pair: "Maria loves Groningen." and "This is a city in the Netherlands." the output of the classifier is "True" and for the pair "Maria loves Groningen." and "It was a tasty cake." the output should be "false" as there is no obvious continuation between the two sentences.

> Already the second pre-training task gives us an idea of the power of BERT: after it has been pretrained on hundreds of thoudands of texts, one can plug-in a classifier on top and re-use the *linguistic* knowledge previously acquired to fine-tune it for a specific task, without needing to learn the weights of the whole network from scratch all over again. In the next sections we will describe the components of BERT and show how to use it. This model and hundreds of related transformer-based pre-trained encoders can also be found on [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/google-bert/bert-base-cased).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Already the second pre-training task gives us an idea of the power of BERT: after it has been pretrained on hundreds of thousands of texts, one can plug-in a classifier on top and re-use the *linguistic* knowledge previously acquired to fine-tune it for a specific task, without needing to learn the weights of the whole network from scratch all over again. In the next sections we will describe the components of BERT and show how to use it. This model and hundreds of related transformer-based pre-trained encoders can also be found on [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/google-bert/bert-base-cased).
```

:::

# BERT Architecture

Now that we used the BERT language model component we can dive into the architecture of BERT to understand it better.

As in any basic NLP pipeline, the first step is to pre-process the raw text so it is ready to be fed into the Transformer. Tokenization in BERT does not happen at the word-level but rather splits texts into what they call WordPieces (the reason for this decision is complex, but in short, researchers found that splitting *human words* into *subtokens* exploits better the character sub-sequences inside words and helps the model converge faster). A word then sometimes is decomposed into one or several (sub) tokens.

1. **Tokenizer:** splits text into tokens that the model recognizes
2. **Embedder:** converts each token into a fixed-sized vector that represents it. These vectors are the actual input for the Encoder.
3. **Encoder** several neural layers that model the token-level interactions of the input sequence to enhance meaning representation. The output of the encoder is a set of **H**idden layers, the vector representation of the ingested sequence.

> 5. **Output Layer:** the final encoder layer (which we depict as a sequence **H**'s in the figure) contains arguably the best token-level representations that encode syntactic and semantic properties of each token, but this time each vector is already contextualized with the  the specific sequence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. **Output Layer:** the final encoder layer (which we depict as a sequence **H**'s in the figure) contains arguably the best token-level representations that encode syntactic and semantic properties of each token, but this time each vector is already contextualized with the specific sequence.
```

![BERT Architecture](fig/bert3.png)

## BERT Code

Let's see how these components can be manipulated with code. For this we will be using the HugingFace's _transformers_ python library. We can install it with:

```sh
pip install transformers
```

The first two main components we need to initialize are the model and tokenizer. The HuggingFace hub contains thousands of models based on a Transformer architecture for dozens of tasks, data domains and also hundreds of languages. Here we will explore the vanilla English BERT which was how everything started. We can initialize this model with the next lines:

```python
from transformers import BertTokenizer, BertModel
tokenizer = BertTokenizer.from_pretrained('bert-base-cased')
model = BertModel.from_pretrained("bert-base-cased")
```

## BERT Tokenizer

We start with a string of text as written in any blog, book, newspaper etcetera. The `tokenizer` object is responsible of splitting the string into recognizable tokens for the model and embedding the tokens into their vector representations

```python
text = "Maria's passion for music is clearly heard in every note and every enchanting melody."

> # text = "Maria loves Groningen"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

encoded_input = tokenizer(text, return_tensors='pt')
print(encoded_input)
```

The print shows the `encoded_input` object returned by the tokenizer, with its attributes and values. The `input_ids` are the most important output for now, as these are the token IDs recognized by BERT

```
{
    'input_ids': tensor([[  101,  3406,   112,   188,  7615,  1111,  1390, 1110,  3817,  1767, 1107,  1451,  3805,  1105,  1451,  4035, 18546,  1916, 11961,   119, 102]]), 
    'token_type_ids': tensor([[0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]]), 
    'attention_mask': tensor([[1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]])
}
```

 NOTE: the printing function shows transformers objects as dictionaries; however, to access the attributes, you must use the python object syntax, such as in the following example:

```python
print(encoded_input.input_ids.shape)
```
Output:

`torch.Size([1, 21])`

The output is a 2-dimensional tensor where the first dimention contains 1 element (this dimension represents the batch size), and the second dimension contains 21 elements which are equivalent to the 21 tokens that BERT generated with our string input.

::: callout

> You noticed tin the previous outputs the `tensor()` and `torch()` wrappers around the arrays of integers. This is showing that the `transformers` library uses `pytorch` underneath, one of the most popular libraries for Deep Learning in Python. Pytorch's basic unit is the Tensor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You noticed in the previous outputs the `tensor()` and `torch()` wrappers around the arrays of integers. This is showing that the `transformers` library uses `pytorch` underneath, one of the most popular libraries for Deep Learning in Python. Pytorch's basic unit is the Tensor.
```

> A *tensor* is a generalization for multidimentional array data. By convention, a vector is a 1-dimensional sequence of scalar numbers (or a 1-dim tensor), a matrix is a 2-dimensional sequence (2-dim tensor) and for N-dimensions where N > 2 we use the concept of tensor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A *tensor* is a generalization of a multidimentional array of data. By convention, a vector is a 1-dimensional sequence of scalar numbers (or a 1-dim tensor), a matrix is a 2-dimensional sequence (2-dim tensor) and for N-dimensions where N > 2 we use the concept of tensor.
```

::: callout

When running examples in a BERT pre-trained model, it is advisable to wrap your code inside a `torch.no_grad():` context. This is linked to the fact that BERT is a Neural Network that has been trained (and can be further finetuned) with the Backpropagation algorithm. Essentially, this wrapper tells the model that we are not in training mode, and we are not interested in _updating_ the weights (as it would happen when training any neural network), because the weights are already optimal enough. By using this wrapper, we make the model more efficient as it does not need to calculate the gradients for an eventual backpropagation step, since we are only interested in what _comes out_ of the Encoder. So the previous code can be made more efficient like this:

```python
import torch 

with torch.no_grad():
    output = model(**encoded_input)
    print(output)
    print(output.last_hidden_state.shape)
```

:::

# BERT as a Language Model

> Now that we know hoe to embedd and run the model for obtaining the representations we can test the code for our first NLP Task: Language Modelling (LM). As mentioned before, the main pre-training task of BERT is, LM; in general this is the task of calculating the probability of a word based on the known neighboring words (yes, Word2Vec was also a kind of LM). Obtaining training data for this task is very cheap, as all we need is millions of sentences from existing texts, without any labels. In this setting, BERT encodes a sequence of words, and predicts from a set of English tokens, what is the most likely token that could be inserted in the `[MASK]` position

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we know how to embedd and run the model to obtain the representations, we can test the code for our first NLP Task: Language Modelling (LM). As mentioned before, the main pre-training task of BERT is LM: calculating the probability of a word based on the known neighboring words (yes, Word2Vec was also a kind of LM). Obtaining training data for this task is very cheap, as all we need is millions of sentences from existing texts, without any labels. In this setting, BERT encodes a sequence of words, and predicts from a set of English tokens, what is the most likely token that could be inserted in the `[MASK]` position
```

{'score': 0.19168031215667725, 'token': 13473, 'token_str': 'pizza', 'sequence': 'I want to eat a cold pizza this afternoon'}
{'score': 0.14800849556922913, 'token': 25138, 'token_str': 'turkey', 'sequence': 'I want to eat a cold turkey this afternoon'}
{'score': 0.14620967209339142, 'token': 14327, 'token_str': 'sandwich', 'sequence': 'I want to eat a cold sandwich this afternoon'}
{'score': 0.09997560828924179, 'token': 5953, 'token_str': 'lunch', 'sequence': 'I want to eat a cold lunch this afternoon'}
{'score': 0.06001955270767212, 'token': 4014, 'token_str': 'dinner', 'sequence': 'I want to eat a cold dinner this afternoon'}

=====	 Maria [MASK] Groningen
{'score': 0.24399833381175995, 'token': 117, 'token_str': ',', 'sequence': 'Maria, Groningen'}
{'score': 0.12300779670476913, 'token': 1104, 'token_str': 'of', 'sequence': 'Maria of Groningen'}
{'score': 0.11991506069898605, 'token': 1107, 'token_str': 'in', 'sequence': 'Maria in Groningen'}
{'score': 0.07722211629152298, 'token': 1306, 'token_str': '##m', 'sequence': 'Mariam Groningen'}
{'score': 0.0632941722869873, 'token': 118, 'token_str': '-', 'sequence': 'Maria - Groningen'}

```

> When we call the `nlp` pipeline, requesting to return the `top_k` most likely suggestions to complete the provided sentences (in this case `k=5`). The pipeline returns a list of outputs as python dictionaries. Depending on the task, the fields of the dictionary will differ. In this case, the `fill-mask` task returns a score (between 0 and 1, the higher the score the more likely the token is), a tokenId, and its corresponding string, as well as the full "unmasked" sequence. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we call the `nlp` pipeline, we request to return the `top_k` most likely suggestions which complete the provided sentences (in this case `k=5`). The pipeline returns a list of outputs as python dictionaries. Depending on the task, the fields of the dictionary will differ. In this case, the `fill-mask` task returns a *probability score* (between 0 and 1: the higher the score, the more likely the token is), a *tokenId* and its corresponding string, as well as the full "unmasked" sequence. 
```

Reviewer 2: I prefer to avoid using "probability" because, strictly speaking, this is not a probability distribution nor a confidence score, it just happens to be between 0 and 1 and is conveniently interpreted as Prob...

The task of text classification is assigning a label to a whole sequence of tokens, for example a sentence. With the parameter `task="text_classification"` the `pipeline()` function will load the base model and automatically add a linear layer with a softmax on top. This layer can be fine-tuned with our own labeled data or we can also directly load the fully pre-trained text classification models that are already available in HuggingFace.

![BERT as an Emotion Classifier](fig/bert4.png)

Let's see the example of a ready pre-trained emotion classifier based on `RoBERTa` model. This model was fine-tuned in the Go emotions [dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/google-research-datasets/go_emotions), taken from English Reddit and labeled for 28 different emotions at the sentence level. The fine-tuned model is called [roberta-base-go_emotions](https://huggingface.co/SamLowe/roberta-base-go_emotions). This model takes a sentence as input and ouputs a probability distribution over the 28 possible emotions that might be conveyed in the text. For example:

```python

classifier = pipeline(task="text-classification", model="SamLowe/roberta-base-go_emotions", top_k=3)

> sentences = ["I am not having a great day", "Maria loves Groningen"]

Reviewer: Add "This is a lovely and innocent sentence"

text = "Maria's passion for music is clearly heard in every note and every enchanting melody."
encoded_input = tokenizer(text, return_tensors='pt')
token_ids = list(encoded_input.input_ids[0].detach().numpy())
string_tokens = tokenizer.convert_ids_to_tokens(token_ids)
print(string_tokens)

```

As we saw before, this shows a list of 21 token IDs (the ID identifies each token in the embedding layer of the transformer). 

When inspecting the string tokens, we see that most "words" were converted into a single token, however *enchanting* was splitted into three sub-tokens: `'en', '##chan', '##ting'` the hashtags indicate wether a sub-token was part of a bigger word or not, this is useful to recover the human-readable strings later. The `[CLS]` token was added at a beginning and is intended to represent the meaning of the whole sequence, likewise the `[SEP]` token was added to indicate that it is where the sentence ends.

The next step is to give the sequence of tokens to the Encoder which processes it through the transformer layers and outputs a sequence of dense vectors:

```python
with torch.no_grad():
    output = model(**encoded_input)
    print(output.last_hidden_state[0])
```

> When we print the vectors we only see a lot of fine-tuned weights which are not very informative in their own, but the full-vectors are meaningful within the embedding space, which emulates some aspects of linguistic meaning. In the case of wanting to obtain a single vector for *enchanting*, you can average the three vectors that belong to the token pieces that ultimately from that word.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we print the vectors we only see a lot of fine-tuned weights which are not very informative in their own, but the full-vectors are meaningful within the embedding space, which emulates some aspects of linguistic meaning. In the case of wanting to obtain a single vector for *enchanting*, you can average the three vectors that belong to the token pieces that ultimately form that word.
```

We can use the same method to encode another two sentences containing the word *note* to see how BERT actually handles polysemy (*note* means something very different in each sentence) thanks to the representation of each word being contextualized instead of isolated.

```python
# Search for the index of 'note' and obtain its vector from the sequence
note_index_1 = string_tokens.index('note')
note_vector_1 = output.last_hidden_state[0][note_index_1].detach().numpy()
note_token_id_1 = token_ids[note_index_1]

print(note_index_1, note_token_id_1, string_tokens)
print(note_vector_1[:5])
```

> We are basically printing the tokenized sentence from the previous exaple and shoging the index of the token `note` in the list of tokens. We are also printing the tokenID assigned to this token and the list of tokens. Finally, the last print shows the first five dimensions of the vector representing the token `note`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are basically printing the tokenized sentence from the previous example and showing the index of the token `note` in the list of tokens. We are also printing the tokenID assigned to this token and the list of tokens. Finally, the last print shows the first five dimensions of the vector representing the token `note`.
```

```

To be sure, we can compute the cosine similarity of the word *note* in the first sentence and the word *note* in the second sentence confirming that they are indeed two different representations, even when in both cases they have the same token-id and they are the 12th token of the sentence:

```python
from sklearn.metrics.pairwise import cosine_similarity

vector1 = np.array(note_vector_1).reshape(1, -1)
vector2 = np.array(note_vector_2).reshape(1, -1)

similarity = cosine_similarity(vector1, vector2)
print(f"Cosine Similarity 'note' vs 'note': {similarity[0][0]}")
```

With this small experiment, we have confirmed that the Encoder produces context-dependent word representations, ass opposed to Word2Vec, where *note* would always have the same vector no matter where it appeared.

## The Attention Mechanism

The original attention mechanism (remember this was developed for language translation) is a component in between the Encoder and the Decoder that helps the model to _align_ the important information from the input sequence in order to generate a more accurate token in the output sequence:

![The Encoder-Decoder Attention Mechanism](fig/trans3.png)

> In the example above, the attention puts more weight in the input _etudiant_, so the decoder uses that information to _know_ that is should generate _student_. Note that if the decoder based it's next work probability just based in the sequence "I am a ..." it could basically generate any word and still sound natural, but it is thanks to the attention mechanism that it preserves the meaning of the input sequence.

Reviewer: there is a mismatch between the example sentence in the image and the text (which uses French)

> In the example above, the attention puts more weight in the input _etudiant_, so the decoder uses that information to _know_ that is should generate _student_. Note that if the decoder based it's next work probability just based in the sequence "I am a ..." it could basically generate any word and still sound natural, but it is thanks to the attention mechanism that it preserves the meaning of the input sequence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example above, the attention puts more weight in the input _etudiant_, so the decoder uses that information to _know_ that is should generate _student_. Note that if the decoder based it's next word probability just on the sequence "I am a ...", it could basically generate any word and still sound natural. However, it is thanks to the attention mechanism that it preserves the meaning of the input sequence.
```
